# Leading a Team

 - Manager Identity
 – Managing Your Time and Stress
 – Helping Your Team Develop
 – Managing Team Performance Remotely
 – Leading Productive Online Meetings
 – Value of Motivation
 – Effective Conflict Resolution

## Manager Roles

- As a manager, you'll play a few different roles. 
1. `Producer`. You must produce the desired results and achieve the organization's goals through projects and tasks. 
2. `Administrator`. You must administer systems, policies, and procedures so that the organization runs efficiently. 
3. `Innovator`. In order to enact change that serves the organization's future, you'll need to be creative and innovate new ideas or solutions. 
4. `Mediator`. Not only will you need to help our employees work through conflict, you'll also mediate any tensions between the employees' needs and the organization's. 
5. `Culture builder`. You must build a work environment and culture that values its members and supports the organization's goals. 

Each role requires different skill sets and you may be better at some than others. You want to play to your strengths and develop the areas in which you still need to grow. Also, think about how you can utilize the strengths of your people to balance you. It also happens that these roles can actually be in conflict with each other. For example, administering a policy might actually limit innovation, or enacting change might threaten the current culture. 
Part of being a manager is knowing how to balance these roles, and also when to prioritize one over another. This can be confusing, because there's actually two primary perspectives to consider. 
One is the employees' perspective, which focuses on the experience of the people under the manager. This is the one we're all most familiar with, because we've all been under a manager at some point in our careers. 
The other is the organization's perspective, which focuses on the effective completion of work that drives the organization's success. Every manager must find a way to live at the intersection of these two different and sometimes competing perspectives. Let's take a deeper look. 
I'm going to start with the organization's perspective, because it really does come first. Everyone is employed to help the organization accomplish its goals. It's also true that the organization's perspective is what has driven management style since the 1800s. 

**The organization's perspective includes several key questions like:**  
 - Are the assigned projects and tasks completed? 
 - Does the work get completed on time and within the allotted budget? 
 - Is the level of work quality sufficient to accomplish the goals? 
 - Is the organization protected from lawsuits by compliance with state and federal laws and regulations? 
 - Does any innovation occur that enhances the organization's success? 
 - Does the manager hire and develop employees who make positive contributions to the organization over time? 

From this list it becomes obvious that from the organization's perspective, key management skills include: 
 - project management, 
 - time management, 
 - resource management, 
 - communication, 
 - decision making, 
 - people skills, 
 - performance management. 

Now let's switch to the employees' perspective. The people who report to a manager have several key questions like: 
 - Are my tasks and responsibilities made clear? 
 - Am I given the training, guidance, and resources to complete the tasks? 
 - Are my skill sets effectively used, and am I given opportunities to grow? 
 - Am I treated fairly and with respect? 
 - Can I see that my contributions make a difference, and are they measured accurately? 
 - Is my worth accurately assessed and valued? 
 - Is there a clear career path for me to advance and grow? 

**From the employees' perspective, key management skills include**  
 - communication, 
 - people skills, 
 - performance management, 
 - training, 
 - coaching, 
 - fairness or ethics. 

There is overlap. The employee interaction is in service of the organization's goals, and the organization provides meaningful work and fair compensation to the employee. To be a successful manager, you’ll need to find a way to artfully navigate the inherent tensions and opportunities that live between the needs of your employees and the goals of your organization.

## Establishing Trust

Establishing trust is an ongoing practice, something you do every day in your words and actions. As a manager, your success is dependent on creating an environment where you're seen as trustworthy, not only by your directory ports but also your supervisors and your peers. So how do you build trust? Let's look at the key practices. 
First, have integrity with your words and actions. This means that you do what you said you would. You follow through, meet deadlines, and keep your promises. This is not occasionally, but all the time. In the rare instances where you cannot deliver, you take responsibility, explain why, and even apologize when appropriate. 
Second, share your values. People have to know what you stand for in order to assess if you have integrity or not. Study after study shows that people assess trustworthiness based on how well you live in alignment with your values. They can do this faster if they know what your values are. Interestingly, they don’t have to like or approve your values for you to establish trust. 
Third, make ethical choices. Ethics are another important aspect of integrity. How they differ is that each culture or society has its own laws and norms that determine what's considered ethical within that context. Acting ethically is about being in alignment with the agreed-upon standards of that community. Certainly, the workplace has some agreed-upon standards, like not discriminating against people. Sometimes, an industry has a code of ethics like medicine's Hippocratic Oath of do no harm, and many organizations have their code of ethics that they outline in shared values or specific policies and practices. 
Fourth, sincerely listen to others. When you listen to others without judgment, it makes it easier for them to open up in the future. You want to be a place where people can bring their honest concerns, needs, priorities, and hopes and know that you'll listen. This doesn't mean that you have to give them everything they want. In fact, you often won't be able to. But if you listen and respond with respect, you'll build trust with every conversation. 
Fifth, be accountable for your actions. Part of managing is taking risks and making decisions. Sometimes you'll be successful, and sometimes you won't. If you blame others or make excuses, you'll damage trust. And if you take credit for other people's work, you harm trust too. So be accountable for your actions, both good and bad. Admit your mistakes and be proud of your wins. 
Sixth, be honest in your communication. Your word has to mean something. This is not only following through on promises, but also that you can be honest about anything. Sometimes honesty is hard. It means that you offer realistic assessments, frank critiques, and clear opinions. That can be challenging if you know the other person won't like what you have to say or may be hurt by it. But trust is also built on people knowing that you'll be honest. Find ways to communicate honestly and clearly, but also with kindness and empathy. It will make it easier to hear what you have to say. 
Seventh, respond to feedback. You'll be the recipient of feedback, and how you handle it is part of building trust. If you get defensive or shoot the messenger, you're gonna harm trust. As a manager, 
you have power in the relationship. So, you need to intentionally seek feedback and then make changes. Remember, people leave a boss, not a company. Before they leave, they'll try once or twice to give you feedback. If you don’t change, they'll start disengaging as they get ready to leave. So, take feedback very seriously. In fact, intentionally seek it out. Don’t just wait for people to bring you feedback or complaints. Actively seek out their opinions, both good and bad, about how things are going and reward honesty. When someone has the courage to tell you challenging news, sincerely thank them. They've shown you a great sign of respect. This is all part of making it safe to take risks. 
The last and most important practice, one of the worst things that can happen in work setting is if there's a culture of fear. When people are afraid, they're obviously not in trust. And even worse, you've shut down the pathway to creativity and innovation, something that all organizations need to be successful. As a manager, you need to create a culture where it's safe to take risks. Be open to hearing feedback or ideas that are different from yours. Also, don’t allow your employees to treat each other poorly. And don’t tolerate behavior that undermines safety for anyone in the organization. Be clear about how performance issues are handled. People feel safer if they trust that the process will be fair. 
If you consistently focus on building trust, you'll be able to do so. But the work doesn't stop there. While it takes time to build trust, it can be destroyed overnight. One violation on your part, can undo months of hard work. So make establishing trust one of your top and ongoing priorities. It should be built on a set of these practices that you use every day

## Going from peer to manager 
So you’ve been promoted to manager. Congratulations, this is a great opportunity, and if you’re like most people you’re simultaneously excited and nervous, I know I was. We’ve all experienced bad bosses, and I’m sure you want to do a good job and be someone your employees trust and respect. In fact, that should be your goal. To build a relationship with them based on trust and respect. 
In this chapter we’ll cover ways you can do that, but first let’s talk about how you transition from being a peer to a manager. 
If you’re coming in from the outside and haven’t worked alongside your reports it can be easier, because you don’t have a previous relationship with them. You come into a role of authority. While they don’t know you, they also don’t have any preconceived notions about you. However, you’ll have more work to do to help them get to know you and trust you. 
If you’ve been promoted to supervise your colleagues, they do know you, which means they have some beliefs about who you are and how you’ll manage. These may or may not be accurate, so you may need to overcome not only their assumptions but your own. 
Whether you’re promoted from within or hired from the outside the following strategy should guide your actions the first few weeks and months. 
First, have patience with their nervousness. You probably remember having a new boss yourself, because we’ve all lived with poor managers people are somewhat anxious to see what kind of manager you’re going to be. This means that they’ll simultaneously be putting on their best behavior for you, and also guarded about what they share with you. They’ll also be trying to bend your ear about their priorities and concerns. That’s good, you want to learn all you can so listen. Just don’t promise anything early on until you’ve really had time to assess everything. 
This is a great time to focus on getting to know your people, your second strategy. One of the best things any new manager can do is to make a point of meeting with each of your people to learn more about them. Here are some key questions to ask: 
 - Tell me about your role 
 - I’d like to hear your perspective on what your priorities are and the challenges that you face. 
 - How I can support you in being successful? 
 - How do you like to be supervised? 
 - What motivates and engages you at work? 

At this point, don’t make any promises about what you will or won’t do. It’s too early to commit to anything. 
Also, it’s a good idea to meet with your colleagues in other departments, and also those above you. Ask them the first two questions, you’ll learn a lot. This is all part of the third strategy, which is to take time and gather information. This is certainly important if you’re new to the organization, but it’s even more so if you’re already working there and here’s why. As you move up you gain a whole new perspective about things. You’ll be privy to all kinds of information that you didn’t have before. You’ll learn more about the people above you, the organization’s goals and challenges, as well as confidential information about the budget and personnel files. Trust me when you move up, it’s a whole new world. So you want to take time to learn all that you can before you make any big decisions, or implement new ideas. While you may be brimming with them, it’s in your best interest to slow down, and thoroughly explore the real lay of the land. 
Fourth, be transparent with your values and philosophy. While you may be waiting to design and implement changes, you can use this time to share your values and management philosophy. This is how you start building trust and establishing your integrity. Your employers are nervous, and they want and need to know who you’re going to be. 
Fifth, take time to craft your overall strategy. Once you’ve gathered information you want to think about how you can address and resolve some of the challenges while also maximizing strengths and opportunities. This all needs to work within the structures and resources you have. By crafting your overall plan it will help you map out how you’ll make changes over time. In addition, it will be the North Star that will guide your decision making in all kinds of situations. 
Finally, pace yourself. I know you may be chomping at the bit to get started, but if you rush too quickly you may accidentally damage the relationships you’re trying to build. Your effectiveness as a manager is completely dependent on your ability to build positive working relationships with people all over your organization. So, focus on that first, and the rest will follow.

## Understanding management styles 
Management styles are the patterns of behavior people use when they hold management positions. These patterns of behavior include how they communicate, make decisions, supervise, and motivate. 
There's a range of management styles and all are a blend of three key behaviors. Task direction, decision making, and relationship building. 
Task direction is when the manager tells the employee what to do, as well as when, where, and how. This may involve teaching and training as well as directives and instructions. 
Decision making is the extent to which the manager involves employees in the decision making process. This exists on a continuum. At one end, employees have no involvement at all, and at the other end the manager delegates decision making completely to the employees. 
Relationship building is how the manager forms a relationship with each employee as well as creates the work environment or culture for the team as a whole. It includes coaching, motivating and engaging employees, open communication, and respect. 
Let me walk through the most common management styles. 
"The Director." This manager wants to be in charge so controls all aspect of decision making. They provide a lot of task direction and are often seen as micro-managers. Directors don't engage much in relationship building although they can be cordial. A hallmark phrase is, "Do what I say." This autocratic style is appropriate when employees have very low levels of skill or initiative, or when the organization is in a crisis and needs immediate change. However, The Director ultimately does harm to the organization, because employees are not motivated and don't get opportunities to develop. 
"The Consultant." This manager still maintains control of decision making, but knows that relationship building is important so consults with employees to gain their input. Employees can feel more engaged with this style, if the consulting is genuine. Consultants still provide task direction, but allow low levels of autonomy. The phrase for this style is, "I value your input." This style works well with employees who are growing in their skills or confidence, but not yet to the level where they can handle complex tasks on their own. 
"The Consensus Builder," who manages democratically. This manager genuinely seeks input and feedback from all sides. They focus on what's best for the group, so often make decisions based on majority preference or consensus. The phrase here is, "What do you think?" The downside of this style is that they may take too much time seeking input, or ignoring the best decision, in favor of the choice that has the most support. 
"The Coach." This manager focuses on creating a highly productive and motivated staff. They provide both training as well as encouragement to grow. They often create a fun and positive work environment with lots of team building and social activities. The hallmark phrase is, "How can I support you?" This style is great for mid to high performers. But coaches can stumble if they have poor performers or difficult employees who don't respond to their encouragement. 
"The Visionary." This manager has an exciting vision and they're good at inspiring or persuading others to get onboard. Often, they're great at strategic thinking but not so good with tactical skills. This manager is exemplified by the phrase, "Follow me!" To thrive under this style, employees need to be independent because they have to figure out the day-to-day work for themselves. 
"The Delegator." This manager uses a very hands off or Laissez-faire approach to management. They turn over almost complete control to their team, stepping in only when necessary. This style only works well with high performing employees. The phrase here is, "You've got this." Delegators have to remember that while they may be able to hand over task performance and decision making, they must continue to build relationships. 
"The Narcissist," and it's actually the most harmful style, with very few redeeming qualities. The narcissist maintains control by providing a lot of task direction and no decision making. They engage in relationship building but only to garner favors or support, abruptly dropping people when it no longer suits their needs. This person is very self-centered, but they can still be likable, often even charming. But they rule with an iron fist, using punishments from firing to petty retaliations to keep people in line. People under them are in fear so they cannot speak up or seek help. Often once this person leaves or is let go, a whole series of shocking information comes to the surface. To know if you have this most toxic kind of boss, look for high turn over, or a boss that takes all the credit for their team's successes, and blames their team for any failures. 
As you review these styles, think about which styles you've experienced as an employee. What impact did the styles have on your productivity, motivation, and loyalty to the organization? Also, consider which style is most like you. We all tend to have a favorite or natural style that we use the most. 

### Choosing the right style 
So which style should you choose? Well, it all depends on your situation. With the exception of the Narcissist, all of the styles can be useful in certain context. While no one individual style is good or bad, a management style can be a good or poor fit for the situation, which determines its effectiveness. 
Let's start with your natural style of management. Which of the styles is most like you? If you're not sure, ask friends and colleagues for their feedback. 
It's important to know which style you default to, because that's what you're likely to do under stress. Ultimately, your natural style may be the fit for some of your employees, and they will thrive 
under you, but if you want your entire team to thrive, you must be willing to become versed in all of the styles. It's the manager's responsibility to be the chameleon and change your style to suit the situation. By picking the best style for the situation, you'll maximize the productivity and engagement of your people. To determine which style to use, first assess the skills and attitudes of each of your employees. Consider their job description and identify the skills or competencies they need to be successful. Rate their current competence in those skills. 
Also look at their attitudes. Are they enthusiastic and motivated? Cautious or nervous, or even disengaged and bored? Look at how they get along as a group. Are they cohesive and friendly? Or is there a lot of tension or conflict? Now, you apply combinations of task direction, relationship-building and decision-making to bring out their best. 
With employees who are new or unskilled, use high amounts of task direction and relationship-building. This will help them learn what they need to do the job, as well start building a positive connection between you. You'd want to use the director and consultant styles. Over time, as you see evidence that your employees are becoming more skilled and confident, you'll throttle back on task direction as needed and maintain relationship-building. Also now add some decision-making to push their growth and development. Now you don't just hand over a big decision to them, but first start involving them in discussions about decision-making. Begin by seeking their input and sharing what you're doing and why. As they get the hang of it, then you can let them make some low-risk decisions. This is when you might want to use the consensus builder and coach styles. Continue to build relationships as you push their skill development with more and more opportunities for decision-making. Once your employees are highly skilled, you can delegate a lot of things to them. At this point, you're providing very little task-direction and even then, it's rare. You're also giving them a lot of autonomy with decision-making, increasing the complexity of projects to keep them challenged and engaged. You can also dial down the relationship-building, as you should have a strong foundation of trust and respect to stand on. However, be careful that you don't stop relationship-building altogether. Even your top performers still need encouragement and acknowledgement. You'll find that the visionary and delegator styles work well for you here. Especially because as your team grows, you can manage them less and less, allowing you to turn your focus toward leadership and strategy. 
One more tip, think of yourself as a habit-changer. Seriously, current developments in neuroscience have revealed new and exciting information about how humans form habits. Habits shape everything we do, from our professional to our personal lives. Every day we engage in habit loops, that have been well-built over time, and in many cases are quite grooved, both behaviorally and neurologically. Think about your own day. Habit is behind your commute to the office, how you behave in meetings, and even how you answer your phone. When we do behaviors over and over again, they become grooved, and even develop thicker neurological pathways. In fact, research has shown that it takes about 40 repetitions of a behavior before it becomes grooved as a habit, and 66 shows measurably thickening of the pathways. 
What does this have to do with management? Well, first, as a manager, you have your own habits. Your default management style is one of them. It's well-grooved. If you want to help yourself become better at the other styles, you have to practice them, so they become habits too. In addition, managing people is largely about helping them form new habits, or better ones. As you give them task direction, or opportunities to make decisions, you're helping them develop new habits for working. Effective managers are patient and allow people time to learn and grow. Knowing that after about 40 repetitions of any new behavior, habits get formed. So play with the six styles, using them based on what's the best fit for the situation. You may even use one style with one employee, and a different style with another. Ultimately, your goal is to bring out the best in your people, and the right choice of management style is how you accomplish this.


## Knowing when you're managing and when you're leading 
Throughout your day, you're probably going back and forth between managing and leading. In today's modern organizations, leadership and management are closely intertwined because almost all people who manage others and projects or functions also have to provide leadership to their people in the organization. Let's explore the important distinctions between them. 
The primary goal of leadership is to produce change and growth. The work of a leader is to envision a better tomorrow and design the change that will get the organization from here to there. 
The primary goal of management is to produce order and consistency. The work of a manager is to create a stable work environment that's clear and consistent so that employees can be as productive as possible. There are some natural tensions between management and leadership. Think about your day-to-day work over the past two weeks and identify when you're managing and when you're leading. Here are some key things to look for. 
1. The first distinction is about approach. Managing is tactical and hands-on, while leading is strategic and visionary. This is because the time frame is different. 
2. Managing occurs in the here and now. You're looking at the short-term and mid-range goals that ensure success of the organization today. Contrast that with leading, where the focus in on the future and setting strategy and change to create the organization of tomorrow. 
3. Another difference is that the focus shifts. For management, the focus is narrow and internal whereas the leader's view is broad and external, including other functions, industry, market, and national and global affairs. 
As an example, let's look at Adriana, who works for The Landen Hotel Company. Landen hotels can be found in 20 countries and 400 cities. Adriana is the Events Manager at a large property in Quito, the capital of Ecuador. She's one of 12 department directors, each of whom report to the hotel manager and have direct reports of their own. Adriana manages a team of four people, and they interface with several departments from facilities to the kitchen. Adriana is managing when she runs department meetings discussing upcoming events. She's leading when she identifies that many companies now have remote employees, and she proposes new models for hosting conferences that'll allow for remote access. 
4. Managing relies on current resources and structures, while leading designs new ones for the future. 
Adriana is using her managing skills when she conducts a performance review for an employee using the current system. She's leading, when after learning more about what drives employee engagement, she proposes that the company's performance management system change from target-based to competency-based measures. 
5. For managing the task goals are directing the daily work of employees to achieve currently identified goals, whereas leading requires planning for the future, setting a long-term vision and strategy to bring about the change. 
Adriana is managing when she implements a new online event management system and provides training on how to use it. She's leading when she creates an innovative internship program with a local culinary school to cultivate the best students as future employees and caterers. 
6. The people skills differ as well. Both managing and leading rely on emotional intelligence, but managing is more tactical, like conducting one-on-one meetings, delegating tasks, and coaching employees to improve performance. Leading is about building the culture to maximize engagement, inspiring various stakeholders with a compelling vision, fostering collaboration, and cultivating the next generation of leaders. All of this is in service to achieving the future potential of the organization by maximizing the most important asset, its talented people. 
Adriana is managing when she delegates various events to her team, rotating roles to build their skills. She's leading when she identifies some high potential employees and creates a cross functional team to assess industry trends and innovate new models.


## Resolving Conflict

How do you feel about conflict? It's interesting, but a lot of people think that conflict is a bad thing. Something to be avoided or deescalated as quickly as possible. But conflict is a natural byproduct of both group development and diversity. Much of conflict is healthy and contributes to the growth of the individual and the organization. As a manager, you'll find that dealing with conflict is a normal part of your responsibilities. One model that's very helpful to know, is Tuckman's five stages of group development. Tuckman did research on groups, and his findings have stood the test of time. This model is still taught in today's business schools. The first stage is called forming. This is the time when the members are introduced to the group, and they get acquainted. The second stage is called storming, because it's when conflict arises. The group is sorting out their differences as they try to organize their goals and ideas. The third stage is called norming, and this is when group cohesion gets established. Members find effective ways to share ideas and suggestions. Performing is the fourth stage, and the group achieves interdependence. Members are self-directed and productive. Groups can hang out in this fourth stage for quite a while, but eventually they move into the last stage, adjourning. This is when the project or group is wrapped up. Members finish up the task, organize reports and documents, and they celebrate their successes. As a manager, you need to expect conflict and be comfortable handling it. The goal is to know the difference between healthy conflict and toxic conflict that can do harm. You can identify toxic conflict by the following, people openly use insulting or demeaning words and actions, like name-calling, shaming and sneering, or people sabotage or undermine the efforts of another, usually behind their back. Both methods are destructive. They not only kill trust, but they also undermine the efforts and goals of the group and organization. You should have a zero-tolerance policy for these kinds of conflict behaviors. However, toxic conflict is rare, and only shows up when people cannot resolve their differences through more open and healthy means. To this end, you want to create an environment where healthy conflict can be embraced. Let's see how Adriana demonstrates the following strategies: • First, she designs regular opportunities where people can have open discussions about issues. Adriana encourages debate by asking for alternative ideas and solutions. She makes the devil's advocate a regular member of her meetings by intentionally exploring the other side of issues and she makes it clear that it's okay to disagree with her. • Second, Adriana regularly role models how to have healthy debate, and what respectful disagreement looks like. We don't see many examples of this in our society and you'd be surprised how effective a little modeling can be. • Third, when conflict does arise, Adriana gives it a little space and time to let her team handle it on their own. You want to avoid stepping in too early. As long as you don't see anything toxic, you can afford to see what happens. • Fourth, when people come to Adriana, she supports them in working it out. She empowers them to take responsibility for the situation. She has set the expectation that they need to first attempt to resolve the conflict. And if they come to her, they must share what steps they've already taken. If you need to step in, do so as a coach, using clarity and skill coaching to help the people involved move to resolution. Here's some great questions to ask: • Can you identify what the source of conflict is for you? • What are your needs, concerns and goals in this situation? • Are there any hidden agendas, vested interests or emotional attachments at play? • How would you summarize the other person's perspective? • Where are your places of agreement? • And can you build on those? And identify some possible solutions that would close the gap between your differences. Remember, the goal is not to prevent conflict, but embrace it to help your group grow and thrive.

**Tuckman's five stages of group development**  

|Sr. no| Term used | Definition                                                                                                                                                       |
|-----:| ----------|:-------------:                                                                                                                                                    |
|  1   | Forming    | Forming occurs when members of a team first meet, interact, and build the foundations for their working relationship. |
|  2   | Storming   | Team members explore the ways in which they conflict and work through smoothing out these differences productively. |
|  3   | Norming    | Team members begin to act like a team and establish a collective identity. |
|  4   | Forming    | Team typically exhibits team harmony, high productivity, an ability to manage team conflict, adaptability, and successful development of both individuals and the collective team.|




## Critical Thinking

**Summary from critical thinking e-learning**  

|Sr. no| Term used | Definition                                                                                                                                                       |
|-----:| ----------|:-------------:                                                                                                                                                    |
|  1   | 5 whys    | An analytical technique where you ask “Why?” five times to understand why something is happening. This approach can lead you to the issue’s root cause|
|  2   | 7 so whats| An analytical technique where you ask “So what?” seven times to understand the future implications of any actions you might take. This helps you identify possible new problems or opportunities that will arise from your actions|
|  3   | 80/20 rule| Also known as the Pareto principle, this rule suggests that 80% of the effects of an issue come from 20% of the issue’s causes.|
|  4   | root cause| The earliest underlying factor contributing to a problem|

## References:

 - Management Foundations - https://www.linkedin.com/learning/management-foundations-5/the-task-and-people-balance?u=2113185
 - Building Your Team - https://www.linkedin.com/learning/building-your-team/forming-stage?u=2113185
 - Critical Thinking - https://www.linkedin.com/learning/critical-thinking/welcome-to-critical-thinking?u=2113185
